Situational awareness is how to read your surroundings to help keep you safe
from incidents, including accidents, crime and terrorism.
Understand that bad things can happen anywhere, even in low risk locations,
and acknowledge they could happen to you.
It is more a mindset than a skill, everyone can do it.
In fact we all do, everyday, not just during travel.
Preparation is essential for good situational awareness.
Try to understand what risks you may face and research how to deal with them.
Find out if there are unsafe areas, then study the layout of your destination.
Use online maps.
Where will you be going and where are the unsafe areas?
Plan your routes, stick to main roads, avoid shortcuts.
Think where you can get help. Identify safe locations.
What do you need with you? Leave unnecessary items behind.
What are you showing to strangers such as company logos or valuable items.
Do you blend in?
Are you setting patterns that make you predictable?
When in public pay attention. You need to use your eyes and ears,
so don't wear your headphones, and look up and over the shoulder of the person in front.
When walking, don't look at the soles of feet of the person in front of you, or your phone screen.
Monitor your route. Look at people, around people and objects, check reflections.
Try to understand what should be normal.
In this scene you would expect to see passengers, guards, cleaners.
But these characters might raise alarm bells.
Look and listen for anything out of place.
Trust your instincts. If something doesn't feel right, it probably isn't.
Without staring, observe people's body language.
Do they look relaxed or tense? Is their pose threatening?
Read their mood from their eyes.
People know when you have seen them, know you are alert, and look for an easier target.
Consider your location. If static - do you have good visibility
in all directions and is your back protected?
If moving, is it well lit, is there help nearby, are there escape routes?
Remember to use your ears.
React immediately to any threat, and move away from source. Orientate yourself to the danger.
Where are other people moving?
Remember to trust your instincts.
If you sense, or feel threatened, do something:
Check behind you, go back the way you came, cross the road,
join other people, enter a safe location.
Reassess your situation.
Are you safe?
Get out of danger.
Applying these tips will improve your situational awareness,
giving you better defence against most threats, keeping you safer.